PEP 634, PEP 635, PEP 636: Create the structure for the PEP 622 split (#1598)
python/peps: pep-0635.rst

https://github.com/gvanrossum/patma/blob/master/examples/expr.py#L231

TODO: Could we say more here?

Pattern and functional style
----------------------------

Most Python applications and libraries are not written in a consistent
OO style -- unlike Java, Python encourages defining functions at the
top-level of a module, and for simple data structures, tuples (or
named tuples or lists) and dictionaries are often used exclusively or
mixed with classes or data classes.

Pattern matching is particularly suitable for picking apart such data
structures.  As an extreme example, it's easy to write code that picks
a JSON data structure using ``match``.

TODO: Example code.

Motivation (Tobias' version)
============================

**This section should explain why we think pattern matching is a good
addition for Python.**

Since Python is a dynamically typed language, Python code frequently
has to deal with data that comes in different forms and shapes.  This,
in turn, gives rise to a high degree of versatility by favouring a
'duck typing' style, imposing only the bare minimum of requirements
on the form and shape of data, i.e. the structure of data objects.

> Nonetheless, we find that Python code is often sparkled with

Reviewer: Yes, of course.

conditions depending on ``isinstance``, ``len``, ``getattr``,
``hasattr``, etc.  Despite the benefits of 'duck typing', actual
code still requires to query the format or type of an object in order
to choose an appropriate processing action or to extract relevant bits

> of information.

Reviewer: My goal was rather to argue that pattern matching and duck typing complement each other nicely.  Pattern matching is usually associated with strict static typing, whereas I tried to argue here that is perfectly suited for dynamic languages as well.

Unfortunately, the conditions for slightly more complex structures
quickly grow into sequences of partly interdependent bits of
structural tests, hurting readbility and maintability.  Pattern
matching offers here a more direct scheme of expressing the minimal
structure that an objects needs to have in order to allow for further
processing.  Rather than writing a series of manual tests, patterns

> follow a *declarative* style, which is well-known for improved

Reviewer: Agreed.  We can easily focus on the declarative nature of pattern matching.

readability, maintability, and for delegating the burden of efficient
execution on the compiler and interpreter.

The concept of pattern matching is similar to regular expressions,
where succinct patterns describe a textual structure.  A dedicated
compiler then transforms these declarative patterns into highly
efficient finite state machines.  In contrast to regular expressions,
pattern matching targets Python objects rather than textual data,

> and builds on *decision trees* as the driving motor for finding a

Reviewer: The reason for bringing in this idea of the decision tree is to offer a true alternative to `if`-`elif`-`else` chains and, moreover, to contrast it with lookup tables à la `switch`.  I really tried hard to not miss an opportunity to hint at the difference between pattern matching and `switch` ;-).

> and builds on *decision trees* as the driving motor for finding a

Reviewer: Hmm, yes, you are quite right.  I probably wanted too much with all the different possible aspects.

I did not know that some regex implementations used bytecode rather than a FSMs.  This is probably an example of professional blindness as we often teach FSMs and then explain that regex are an example of them.

It's probably best to just ditch most of this and really concentrate more on the core aspects.

match.  Moreover, pattern matching blends the matching of a suitable
pattern with that of a function, i.e. code that is executed in order
to handle and process the information provided by a specific kind of

> object.

Reviewer: Conceptually, it is a function in that it binds parameters and then executes some code.  Technically, it is not because it does not have its dedicated scope.  But granted: this approach might be too abstract for most readers.

This is similar to for-loops, which conceptually also have an embedded "function" in that they bind parameters and then execute some code (the loop's body).  In _Scala_, for instance, both the body of a loop as well as a case clause are a scope of their own, so that the similarity to a function is very strong.  Other languages (e.g. Grace) have even explicitly defined each case clause to be a function of its own.  Nonetheless, it might feel alien to a Python programmer to see it this way, because there is no dedicated scope in Python and the iteration/pattern variables leak into the surrounding context.

Anyway, my intention behind all this is to really stress the idea of pattern matching as "_extract some data from an object, bind it to new local variables (parameters), and then do something with it_".  In particular as opposed to "choose some action based on the type of an object", because the latter leads to switch semantics.

> object.

Reviewer: I understand, yes.  I think there is actually even a passage in our paper where we discuss the issue that scope and functions are strongly intertwined in Python.

all these constructs share a similar overall structure and some syntax,
their intents and motivation differs highly.  In particular, pattern
matching as proposed here is not intended as or an extension of a switch
structure, although it is possible to emulate it to a large degree with
the syntax proposed here.

Rationale
=========

TBD.

This section should provide the rationale for individual design decisions.
It takes the place of "Rejected ideas" in the standard PEP format.
It is organized in sections corresponding to the specification (PEP 634).

The ``match`` statement
-----------------------

TBD.

The overall syntax of each case clause is similar to that of lambda
functions, although the body of case clauses are blocks of statements
rather than expressions.  Compare, for instance a lambda function to
add two values::

  lambda x, y: x + y
  
with a case clause performing the same operation::

  case x, y:
      return x + y
      
The case clause would, of course, be embedded in a match statement and
ultimately in a function.  Nonetheless, understanding the patterns
following the ``case`` as a generalisation of parameters is a solid

> mental model to approach and understand pattern matching.

Reviewer: OK, let's ditch it.

- The ``if ... elif ... elif ... else`` idiom is often used to find
  out the type or shape of an object in an ad-hoc fashion, using one
  or more checks like ``isinstance(x, cls)``, ``hasattr(x, "attr")``,
  ``len(x) == n`` or ``"key" in x`` as guards to select an applicable
  block.  The block can then assume ``x`` supports the interface
  checked by the guard.  For example::

    if isinstance(x, tuple) and len(x) == 2:
        host, port = x
        mode = "http"
    elif isinstance(x, tuple) and len(x) == 3:
        host, port, mode = x
    # Etc.

  Code like this is more elegantly rendered using ``match``::

    match x:
        case host, port:
            mode = "http"
        case host, port, mode:
            pass
        # Etc.

- AST traversal code often looks for nodes matching a given pattern,
  for example the code to detect a node of the shape "A + B * C" might
  look like this::

    if (isinstance(node, BinOp) and node.op == "+"
            and isinstance(node.right, BinOp) and node.right.op == "*"):
        a, b, c = node.left, node.right.left, node.right.right
        # Handle a + b*c

  Using ``match`` this becomes more readable::

    match node:

>         case BinOp("+", a, BinOp("*", b, c):

Reviewer 2: Missing right paren.

follow a *declarative* style, which is well-known for improved
readability, maintability, and for delegating the burden of efficient
execution on the compiler and interpreter.

The concept of pattern matching is similar to regular expressions,
where succinct patterns describe a textual structure.  A dedicated
compiler then transforms these declarative patterns into highly
efficient finite state machines.  In contrast to regular expressions,
pattern matching targets Python objects rather than textual data,
and builds on *decision trees* as the driving motor for finding a
match.  Moreover, pattern matching blends the matching of a suitable
pattern with that of a function, i.e. code that is executed in order
to handle and process the information provided by a specific kind of
object.

One of the simplest forms of pattern matching that we find in other
languages comes in the form of *function overloading*.  The type and
number of arguments then determine which implementation of a specific
function will be executed.  Object-oriented languages (including
Python) may also use the *visitor pattern* to differentiate an action

> based on the type or class of an object.  Both of these approaches,

Author: I'm not sure I want to be calling out the visitor pattern here, since it is one of the more complicated OO patterns (see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern#Python_example).

A simpler analogy is just method overloading, which also differentiates based on the class. And if you want to have the code outside the classes, a pattern people often recommend (though I find it ugly too) is a dict full of lambdas (or other functions) indexed by class.

Visitor pattern, method overloading and dict-of-lambdas all have in common that they only switch on a single type, and any logic to switch on multiple types or on a type and some other property (e.g. len()) must be put inside the method/lambda. So that's our key argument.

(Function overloading is as powerful as a sequence pattern filled with argument-less class patterns. That's better, but still not enough.)

Reviewer: Yes, I am aware of the visitor pattern on the Wikipedia page and find it really ugly and "_unpythonic_" (I am very caucious with this term, but what I mean here is that the code there goes out of its way to copy and imitate Java as closely as possible, without taking the strengths and nature of Python into consideration at all; similar to the "you can write assembly code in any language" ^_^).

With "method overloading", are you referring to polymorphism or Python's answer to the visitor pattern (how it is done in the AST module)?

Anyway, since there has been some criticism on the mailing list that the visitor pattern already works well and pattern matching is not needed, I feel we should address it somehow and contrast the two (and possible other approaches).

> Visitor pattern, method overloading and dict-of-lambdas all have in common that they only switch on a single type [...]. So that's our key argument.

Yes, I fully agree.

Author: Yes, the visitor pattern is very ugly -- we're using it extensively in mypy and while I agree it's probably the best approach for mypy's needs, it is hard to get it right, and there's a lot of boilerplate involved, making it indeed very unpythonic.

**But...** I think this is too early in the PEP to talk about the visitor pattern (in part because it is so ugly that it feels like a strawman). Yes, we should address it, but preferably quite a bit later in the PEP.

By "method overloading" I just meant adding methods to the subject class. I think the word I was using was "overriding" not "overloading", sorry. This has problems that the visitor pattern is trying to address (by moving the application-specific code out of the central class hierarchy), but nevertheless it is commonly used (e.g. when separating app from library is not deemed important) and much more well-known than the visitor pattern. Dict-full-of-lambdas (or functions) is probably more well-known among Python developers, since it's the "FAQ" answer to "how do I do a switch" (using a class as the key is just one variant of that).

Anyway, your point seems to be that OO languages allow switching on the class of an object using the visitor pattern -- to which I say "duh, you can do that by adding methods". So if you want to contrast patterns with something that can only switch on the class, the simplest example seems to be plain methods. If someone says "but the visitor pattern is more powerful" (which it is, though at terrible cost) our answer is just going to be "but it still only switches on the class".

Another thing that worries me (still) about competing with the visitor pattern is https://github.com/gvanrossum/patma/issues/137. As you may recall, I worked out an example that used to use the visitor pattern and it came down to having a match with N cases where N is the number of classes in the central class hierarchy. Certainly our current implementation makes N isinstance() calls, whereas method dispatch uses log(N) dict lookups.

I recall (though I can't find the code anywhere) doing a larger example (N=60?) and finding that the match/case code was faster than the original code using the visitor pattern. I think it was because the visitor pattern doubles the number of calls (for every visit() call there's an accept() call), but I still can't help worrying about match being O(N) vs. visitor's O(log(N)).

(And sorry for the rant.)

Reviewer: I think we are essentially on the same page here.

Although the visitor pattern is ugly, it does have its places.  I think the different between method overriding/polymorphism and the visitor pattern is that the visitor pattern is a means to add quasi-methods to a class without having to actually touch the class.  From my point of view, it is not so much about one being simpler than the other, but more a question of grouping inside the class hierarchy (i.e. the visitor pattern lets you group your code by method rather than by class).

> but it still only switches on the class

Fully agreed.  And just in case it should come up: even if you incorporate more than just the class into the switch mechanism, you have to write quite some boilerplate and once it is there, everthing has to follow the exact same structure.  In short: pattern matching is great because it is flexible, can work with highly inhomogeneous and non-uniform cases, and has the compiler take over the boilerplate stuff.

> but I still can't help worrying about match being O(N) vs. visitor's O(log(N))

Thinking about that, I feel it is one of those apple-oranges things.  And here is why: the visitor pattern is a specific "algorithm" for solving a problem if you will.  We have been calling out other means such as method overriding, if-elif-chains, and lambda-dictionaries that could achieve the same goal.  Pattern matching, on the other hand, is a matter of "declaration".  It does not really specify how the interpreter picks the correct case clause.  So, in principle, a compiler could choose to implement pattern matching through a visitor pattern under the hood (isn't that the prevalent way of emulating overloaded functions in Python?).  Anyway, I would argue that pattern matching as such does not have a specific runtime complexity.

Author: >  Pattern matching, on the other hand, is a matter of "declaration". It does not really specify how the interpreter picks the correct case clause.

All I know is that our current implementation is O(N), and doing better would require a lot of work. Probably an upper bound is O(D) where D is the inheritance depth of the typical target class (I have an example where it's necessary to walk the entire MRO).

> So, in principle, a compiler could choose to implement pattern matching through a visitor pattern under the hood (isn't that the prevalent way of emulating overloaded functions in Python?).

I don't know how people typically implement overloaded functions; I once wrote a simple multidispatch that used a cache dict whose keys are tuples of classes, and on a cache miss I'd do a linear scan over all overloads. Assuming a fixed number of classes and a long computation that could be O(1), and it certainly feels simpler than building a visitor pattern under the hood.

> Anyway, I would argue that pattern matching as such does not have a specific runtime complexity.

But our reference implementation does, and that's likely what will stick around for a long time.

however, are aimed at 'shallow' structures with little or no direct
support for nested structures or structural information that is not
directly encoded in an object's class or type.  For instance, it is
simple to differentiate between an integer, a string, and a tuple, say,
but becomes quite cumbersome and difficult to differentiate between
tuples of different lengths, or between one containing string elements

> vs. one containing numeric elements.  This is where pattern matching

Author: Careful, `match` can't differentiate between `List[int]` and `List[str]` either.

Reviewer: Yes, it can due to the possibility of nested patterns.  It cannot do `List[str]` or `List[int]` directly, but you can do `tuple(int(), int(), int())`, say.  This is something that is clearly not possible with any of the other approaches.  But I might have to formulate it better.

In short: pattern matching is _deep matching_ as opposed to the _shallow matching_ of other mtehods.

Author: Sure, but the example doesn't quite live up to this claim without further explanation.

Reviewer: Yes.  The text is unclear in its current form.

shines: for structures that go beyond simple class distinctions.

Although pattern matching is a concept that has been known and used

> for decades, we propose a re-interpretation that centres around the

Author: Let's stick to American spelling (I can fix this in a later pass, so you don't have to worry about it).
```suggestion
for decades, we propose a re-interpretation that centers around the
```

Reviewer: Absolutely, I agree (although I will continue writing my drafts more leaned towards British spelling).

> principle of 'duck typing' and builds on existing features of the

Author: How exactly do we leverage duck typing? Most of our checks actually rely on isinstance().

Reviewer: With the attribute-checks (e.g. `object(spam=P, egg=Q)`) we accept any object that has the specified attributes (which in turn match the respective patterns).  I feel this is an important addition for a dynamic language like Python.  The custom match protocol would have been the second important step towards that, although we deferred that.

Author: (As I said in another comment that's an edge case of the class pattern and IMO shouldn't be the core of our argument.)

Python language such as iterable unpacking.  Patterns adopt the syntax

> of parameters as far as possible and, to a somewhat lesser degree,

Author: "as far as possible"? I could argue that we might have gone further... :-) I'd rather stick to sequence/iterable unpacking as a model.

Or is this anticipating the rule that we only bind unqualified names? Honestly that's less important to me than the analogy to unpacking. (In a world where we marked either loads or stores we could capture to dotted names just fine, but pattern matching without sequence unpacking just wouldn't be the same.)

Reviewer: The load/store semantics is only one (small) aspect.  As mentioned above, a successful case clause typically binds values to a couple of local variables and then executes some code.  This really is the basic job description of a function.  Moreover, parameters in a function have a strong _declarative_ nature.  When looking at `def foo(a, b)`, say, the question in what order `a` and `b` are bound is kind of nonsensical and moot.

Iterable unpacking has a strong temporal component to it: the assignments are performed in a well defined order, which means that `x, x = 2, 3` has a well-defined behaviour, whereas you would/could not write `def foo(x, x)`.  And, of course, iterable unpacking then sparks all this discussion about lvalues, which I don't think are a very productive way of approach it.

On the other hand, I understand what you mean with the unpacking being a central piece of the game and I agree with you.  I was mentally thinking that Python has unpacking in function calls, too, anyway (e.g. `foo(*seq)`), but that is a mistake on my part, because it applied to calls rather than the declaration.  So, since Python 3 removed unpacking from formal parameters, this aspect is indeed missing in my approach.  I will have to ponder that for a bit...

> that of targets in iterable unpacking.  In contrast to iterable

Author: I'd start a new paragraph here. Or maybe the reason we don't allow non-sequence iterables should be placed in the rationale for sequence patterns.

Author: ```suggestion
that of targets in iterable unpacking.

In contrast to iterable
```

unpacking, pattern matching is a 'conditional' feature that has to
avoid side-effects, i.e. extracting elements from an abstract iterable
(thus working with actual sequences instead) or assigning to non-local
targets such as object attributes or container elements.  Overall, we
followed the guiding principle that patterns be static templates for
the structure and type of objects, i.e. patterns should depend as
little as possible on the surrounding context or current values of

> variables (other than the subject to be matched, that is).

Author: I'm not sure I care that much about constant-ness. Essentially a (constant) value pattern is always just going to do "load value, compare subject using `==`", and a compiler that optimizes that based on e.g. `final` annotations (PEP 591) can do the same optimization in other contexts as well. (In fact we have to be careful not to link these too closely to literal patterns, since we're not going to switch to `is` when the value is None/True/False.)

Reviewer: I am not sure we are talking about the same thing here.  This passage is meant to explain why pattern matching is not binding attributes or subscripts, say.  It is basically a rephrasing of the notion of declarative style.

Declarative programming is built on the idea that you describe what you want and let the compiler figure out how to best deliver it.  Let us perhaps briefly look back at one of the very first examples for pattern matching ever:
```
fact 0 = 1
fact n = n * fact (n-1)
```
This was actually not meant as a recursive function the way we might think about it today.  The idea is much rather that this defines two equation and then have the compiler figure out how to determine what `fact 5`, say, should be.  The compiler might well choose to solve these equations using an ordinary iterative loop (nowadays known as tail-call optimisation).  Anyway, the point is that we do not care how the compiler translates our equations.

Of course, such an approach works _only if the declarative elements do not have side effects_.  As soon as you have any side effects, then you need to specify the exact order in which things are evaluated and how they can affect each other.  So, the guideline mentioned here is to avoid side effects as much as is possible, giving the compiler room to figure out the details.

Author: In the end I think this may go back to the same root cause as our disagreement about the indentation of `else` -- you see the declarative template, I see the generated code. I like the declarative approach, but I can never forget that underneath it all sits the Python interpreter.

Reviewer: Up to a certain degree, yes.  However, there is yet another side to my view: I like to think along the lines of "_what semantics or guarantees do we need so that the compiler can generate good code automatically_" :-).

Pattern matching is a structure that *maps* different patterns/templates

> to 'function bodies' or actions.  This general mapping structure can be

Author: Hm, 'function bodies' is too closely associated with "variable scope" for comfort. Can we just say "block" or something?

Reviewer: Yes, I think "block" is fine (see discussions above for the background on my current choice of words).

found in different context as well.  Algol-derived languages usually

> provide a switch table that maps ordinal values to actions, whereas Lisp

Author: table -> statement?

Reviewer: Hmm, yes.  Although I want to emphasise that the idea behind the `switch` statement really is the table for fast lookup.

Author: Let's consider that well-known.

has a more general mapping from general conditions to actions.  Although
all these constructs share a similar overall structure and some syntax,
their intents and motivation differs highly.  In particular, pattern
matching as proposed here is not intended as or an extension of a switch

> structure, although it is possible to emulate it to a large degree with

Author: structure -> statement, emulate it -> emulate one.

Reviewer: Agreed.

the syntax proposed here.

Rationale
=========

TBD.

This section should provide the rationale for individual design decisions.
It takes the place of "Rejected ideas" in the standard PEP format.
It is organized in sections corresponding to the specification (PEP 634).

Overview and terminology
------------------------

The ``match`` statement
-----------------------

TBD.

The overall syntax of each case clause is similar to that of lambda
functions, although the body of case clauses are blocks of statements
rather than expressions.  Compare, for instance a lambda function to
add two values::

  lambda x, y: x + y
  
with a case clause performing the same operation::

  case x, y:
      return x + y
      
The case clause would, of course, be embedded in a match statement and
ultimately in a function.  Nonetheless, understanding the patterns
following the ``case`` as a generalisation of parameters is a solid
mental model to approach and understand pattern matching.

Match semantics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _patterns:

> Patterns

Reviewer: I added a brief paragraph (lines 297-301).

--------

Patterns are most aptly described as a generalisation of parameters as
in function definitions.  They also share some characteristics with

> targets of iterable unpacking.  Most importantly, however, patterns are

Reviewer: Yes, although to be fair, I wrote that before reading your comments :-).

> targets of iterable unpacking.  Most importantly, however, patterns are

Author: Yeah, there is some value. (To people who while "why can't I write `case self.x, self.y:` in `__init__` I say that you can't write `def __init__(self, self.x, self.y)` either. :-)

not expressions.  A pattern cannot be evaluated or executed, it is a
static declaration of a structural template.  This declarative nature
is a characteristic it shares with ``global`` statements, for instance,

> but also with regular expressions or context-free grammars.

Reviewer: Agreed.

Python's iterable unpacking can assign values to any valid target,
including attributes and subscripts.  This allows you to write, e.g.,
``self.x, self.y = x, y`` in a class' initialisator, or
``a[i+1], a[i] = a[i], a[i+1]`` to swap two elements in a list.  The
same approach, however, does not work for patterns due to their
'conditional' nature.  It is at the very core of pattern matching that
a pattern may safely fail to match a given subject and reject it.  In
order for this to make sense and to reason about patterns, it is
imperative to avoid any side effects (as far as possible within the
bounds of a dynamic language).  Patterns can therefore not assign
values to arbitrary targets, but rather bind *local* variables to

> values extracted from the data provided.

Reviewer: I fully understand your reservations.  It is certainly true that we cannot have something that is entirely static and declarative in a dynamic language.

On the other hand, if I understood correctly, you and Brandt just argued in [issue 154](https://github.com/gvanrossum/patma/issues/154) that you should expect that your code breaks if you do funny stuff with side effects and all that.  So, at least in some cases we seem to take a pragmatic stance in that all those examples (name lookup, `__eq__`, etc.) _are without side effects_, unless you specifically invent a fancy implementation that adds them.

Don't we have a similar issue when sorting a list, say?  Because the sorting algorithm/implementation may change, there is no guarantee how often the compare methods on each element will be called, anyway.  Hence, if you come up with an implementation where comparing two objects has strange side effects, you cannot expect sort to guarantee that it works correctly...

So, even though there are holes in the abstraction, I feel like this is still an important guiding principle.  And it tells you that if you do funny stuff that violates our assumption, any breakage of the system is on you.

> values extracted from the data provided.

Author: The key difference is that in order to generate efficient code for `match` in a static language, the compiler can look at the class hierarchy, and if the classes are sealed, you can generate a switch table.

But the Python compiler cannot even trust the class hierarchy in the current module (there are lots of hacks that play games with this, e.g. metaclasses, decorators and monkey-patching), and it truly cannot know anything about the class hierarchy in other modules. Even builtins are dicey.

We can generate bytecode that caches the outcome of e.g. `a.b.C` if it occurs in multiple patterns, but the cache would have to be rebuilt each time we enter the same `match` -- even our wildest undefined behavior does not allow us to assume that `a.b.C` will still be the same thing the next time. Ditto for the other things we might cache, like `getattr()` or `__eq__`.

> values extracted from the data provided.

Reviewer: > [...] if the classes are sealed, you can generate a switch table.

I am not entirely sure this is what really happens.  At least, I have not come across a compiler that actually does this.  Rather, the things that I have seen were all based on the decision tree (which is why I brought it up), which would also work for us.

This is probably one of the differences to the visitor pattern: branching on the class alone is not that common in pattern matching.  Except for a lot of cases with just two or three classes involved in the first place (e.g. Scala's "optionals" `Some(x)` vs. `None`, linked lists with `List(head, tail)` vs. `Nil`, trees with `Node(...)` vs. `Leaf`, etc.).  But in these cases, you don't need a switch table, either, as a simple `if` does the job at least as good.

Scala, for instance, compiles a pattern matching expression down to a switch table if and only if all patterns are literal patterns.  I recently had a case where I used named constants instead of putting in all the numeric values directly, and was quite disappointed to find that they compile that to a huge if-elif-else-chain!

I have a feeling that switch tables really start to become interesting and make a difference performance-wise when you have so many possible cases involved that you would not design them as sealed classes anymore.

minimal viable specficiation.

.. _capture_pattern:

Capture Patterns
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Capture patterns take on the form of a name that accepts any value and binds
it to a (local) variable.  In that sense, a simple capture pattern is
basically equivalent to a parameter in a function definition (when the
function is called, eacg parameter binds the respective argument to a local
variable in the function's scope).

A name used for a capture pattern must not coincide with another capture
pattern in the same pattern.  This, again, is similar to parameters, which
equally require each parameter name to be unique within the list of
parameters.  It differs, however, from iterable unpacking assignment, where
the repeated use of a variable name as target is permissible (e.g.,
``x, x = 1, 2``).  The rationale for not supporting ``(x, x)`` in patterns
is its ambiguous reading: it could be seen as in iterable unpacking where
only the second binding to ``x`` survives.  But it could be equally seen as
expressing a tuple with two equal elements (which comes with its own issues).
Should the need arise, then it is still possible to introduce support for

> repeated use of names later on.

Reviewer: I added a paragraph on the store sigils (just below, lines 334-345).  But since the `^x` is already mentioned further below (with constant value patterns), I am not sure if it really adds much at this point.

Generally, the subject is compared to a literal pattern by means of standard
equality (``x == y`` in Python syntax).  Consequently, the literal patterns
``1.0`` and ``1`` match exactly the same set of objects, i.e. ``case 1.0:``
and ``case 1:`` are fully interchangable.  In principle, ``True`` would also
match the same set of objects because ``True == 1`` holds.  However, we
believe that many users would be surprised findings that ``case True:``
matched the object ``1.0``, resulting in some subtle bugs and convoluted
work arounds.  We therefore adopted the rule that the three singleton
objects ``None``, ``False`` and ``True`` match by identity (``x is y`` in
Python syntax) rather than equality.  Hence, ``case True:`` will match only
``True`` and nothing else.  Note that ``case 1:`` would still match ``True``,
though, because the literal pattern ``1`` works by equality and not identity.

Early ideas to induce a hierarchy on numbers so that ``case 1.0`` would
match both the integer ``1`` and the floating point number ``1.0``, whereas
``case 1:`` would only match the integer ``1`` very eventually dropped in

> favour of the simpler and consistent rule based on equality.

Author: Maybe give this more color? Implementing this correctly would be quite expensive, because we'd have to use things like `isinstance(x, numbers.Integral)`, which is expensive (as it's a protocol, not just an ABC). There's not really much precedent of such behavior elsewhere in Python -- `x == 1` matches 1, True, 1.0, even 1.0+0j. And you can write `case int(1)` if you want to insist on an int, or `case i := numbers.Integral() if i == 1` if you want to use the numeric tower.

Recall that literal patterns are *not* expressions, but directly denote a
specific value or object.  From a syntactical point of view, we have to
ensure that negative and complex numbers can equally be used as patterns,
although they are not atomic literal values (i.e. ``-3+4j`` is syntactically

> an expression of the form ``BinOp(UnaryOp('-', 3), '+', 4j)``).

Author: Not in patterns, it isn't. :-)

Interpolated *f*-strings, on the other hand, are not literal values, despite

> their appearance and can therefore not be used as literal patterns.

Author: (OTOH string literal concatenation `"foo" "bar"` is allowed.)

Literal patterns not only occur as patterns in their own right, but also
as keys in *mapping patterns*.

.. _constant_value_pattern:

Constant Value Patterns
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is good programming style to use named constants for parametric values or
to clarify the meaning of particular values.  Clearly, it would be desirable
to also write ``case (HttpStatus.OK, body):`` rather than

> ``case (200, body):``, say.  The main issue that arises here is how to

Author: ```suggestion
``case (200, body):``, for example.  The main issue that arises here is how to
```

> discern capture patterns (variables) and constant value patterns.  The

Author: ```suggestion
distinguish capture patterns (variables) from constant value patterns.  The
```

general discussion surrounding this issue has brought forward a plethora of

> options, which we cannot all fully list here.

Author: I would at least refer to the idea of marking all stores, so that unqualified names could be used as constant values. And specifically the idea of writing `?var` or `$var`.

Reviewer: Totally agreed.  I just was not sure where to put it.  That's why it is not in there, yet.

Strictly speaking, constant value patterns are not really necessary, but
could be implemented using guards, i.e.
``case (status, body) if status == HttpStatus.OK:``.  Nonetheless, the
convenience of constant value patterns is unquestioned and obvious.

The observation that constants tend to be written in uppercase letters or
collected in enumeration-like namespaces suggests possible rules to discern
constants syntactically.  However, the idea of using upper vs. lower case as
a marker has been met with scepticism since there is no similar precedence
in core Python (although it is common in other languages).  We therefore only
adopted the rule that any dotted name (i.e. attribute access) is to be

> interpreted as a constant value pattern as exemplified by ``HttpStatus.OK``

Author: ```suggestion
interpreted as a constant value pattern like ``HttpStatus.OK``
```

> above.  This excludes, in particular, local variables from acting as

Author: ```suggestion
above.  This precludes, in particular, local variables from acting as
```

constants.

> Global variables can only be directly used as constent when defined in other

Author: ```suggestion
Global variables can only be directly used as constant when defined in other
```

> modules, although there are work arounds to access the current module as a

Author: ```suggestion
modules, although there are workarounds to access the current module as a
```

namespace as well.  A proposed rule to use a leading dot (e.g.
``.CONSTANT``) for that purpose was critisised because it was felt that the
dot would not be a visible-enough marker for that purpose.  Partly inspired
by use cases in other programming languages, a number of different

> markers/sigils was proposed (such as ``^CONSTANT``, ``$CONSTANT``,

Author: ```suggestion
markers/sigils were proposed (such as ``^CONSTANT``, ``$CONSTANT``,
```

> ``==CONSTANT``, etc.), although there was no obvious or natural choice.

Author: Probably add `CONSTANT?` and definitely CONSTANT enclosed in backticks (which is hard to spell in markdown so I'd just say it in words).

Reviewer: OK.

The current proposal therefore leaves the discussion and possible
introduction of such a 'constant' marker for future PEPs.

Distinguishing the semantics of names based on whether it is a global
variable (i.e. the compiler would treat global variables as constants rather
than capture patterns) leads to various issues.  The addition or alteration
of a global variable in the module could have unintended side effects on
patterns.  Moreover, pattern matching could not be used directly inside a
module's scope because all variables would be global, making capture

> patterns impossible.

Author: (There was an even worse idea, look whether the name lookup currently succeeds. Not sure it's even worth mentioning it given its flaws?)

Reviewer: I am not quite sure I understand your comment here, sorry...

Author: The idea was to to a lookup of the name, and if it's a NameError, bind it, otherwise compare it.
```
x = 42
match f():
    case x: print("it's 42")
del x
match f():
    case x: print("captured", x)
```
Forget you even saw this. :-)

Reviewer: Ah, OK, thanks.  Yes, I ignored that :-).  It feels a bit like a "random code" generator for all those who enjoy the excitement of unpredictability in their programs ;-).

The syntax of class patterns is based on the idea that de-construction
mirrors the syntax of construction.  This is already the case in virtually
any Python construct, be assignment targets, function definitions or
iterable unpacking.  In all these cases, we find that the syntax for
sending and that for receiving 'data' are virtually identical.

- Assignment targets such as variables, attributes and subscripts: 
  ``foo.bar[2] = foo.bar[3]``;

- Function definitions: a function defined with ``def foo(x, y, z=6)``
  is called as, e.g., ``foo(123, y=45)``, where the actual arguments
  provided at the call site are matched against the formal parameters
  at the definition site;

- Iterable unpacking: ``a, b = b, a`` or ``[a, b] = [b, a]`` or
  ``(a, b) = (b, a)``, just to name a few equivalent possibilities.

Using the same syntax for reading and writing, l- and r-values, or
construction and de-construction is widely accepted for its benefits in
thinking about data, its flow and manipulation.  This equally extends to
the explicit construction of instances, where class patterns ``c(p, q)``
deliberately mirror the syntax of creating instances.

> History and Context

Reviewer: Thanks :).

Frankly, I am time and again amazed to find how many "modern" features and ideas in programming date back decades, even to the early days of computing.  Oftentimes, they simply did not have the technology to realise their ideas back then (most prominently neural nets, of course).

===================

Pattern matching emerged in the late 1970s in the form of tuple unpacking

> and as a means to handle recursive data structures such as linked lists or

Reviewer: I keep forgetting about JSON, but yes, that might be a very good idea to add to the motivation.

trees (object-oriented languages use the visitor pattern for handling
recursive data structures).  The early proponents of pattern matching
organised structured data in 'tagged tuples' rather than ``struct``s as in
_C_ or the objects introduced later.  A node in a binary tree would, for
instance, be a tuple with two elements for the left and right branches,
respectively, and a ``Node``-tag, written as ``Node(left, right)``.  In
Python we would probably put the tag inside the tuple as

> ``('Node', left, right)`` or define a data class `Node` to achieve the

Reviewer: Yes, you are probably right.

same effect.

> Using modern syntax, a depth-first search (DFS) would then be written as

Reviewer: I only added the "(DFS)" because I needed a short name for the class.  That's really about the only reason :-).

follows::

  def DFS(node):
      node match:
          case Node(left, right):
              DFS(left)
              DFS(right)
          case Leaf(value):
              handle(value)

The notion of handling recursive data structures with pattern matching
immediately gave rise to the idea of handling general recursive patterns

> with pattern matching.  Pattern matching would thus also be used to define

Reviewer: What I meant is that the base case might not be a specific data class, but could be any value, really.  In other words: the earliest examples I found basically only had constructor and variable patterns, which was certainly enough to handle recursive data structures.  But integers are not exactly recursive data types (or at least that is not the way we think about it).  Moreover, integers tend to form a large "quasi-open" set, as opposed to the data structures with just a handful of different possible forms.

The differene might perhaps be best described through the question: how hard is it to check whether the match statement is exhaustive?

Anyway,  obviously need to reword this.

> with pattern matching.  Pattern matching would thus also be used to define

Author: Okay, it's definitely good to know that historically constructor (i.e., class) patterns and variable (capture) patterns are the oldest. If you have the information, I'm curious whether the earliest uses had exhaustiveness checking in mind? That would require either "sealed" classes or global knowledge of all possible classes (which at the scale of programs in the 70s might not have seen as insurmountable :-). I guess tuples also theoretically create a large quasi-open set (though Scala somehow imposes a limit of 22 items...).

> with pattern matching.  Pattern matching would thus also be used to define

Reviewer: The question of knowing all possible classes was answered through static typing and because the abstract base class was defined as the union of all possible case classes.  It is, so to speak, the other way round as modern OOP.  

OOP:
```
class Vehicle(): pass
class Car(Vehicle): ...
class Plane(Vehicle): ...
class Train(Vehicle): ...
```
"Functional" style:
```
class Vehicle = Car | Plane | Train
```

And, although it is just a sideline: Scala's limit stems from the fact that tuples need to be defined statically and strongly typed in terms of (generic) classes.  In order to keep meaningful types, you don't want to just use a generic array of objects, but need to allow each item in the tuple to have a different type.  There is basically no way around defining it labourously like this (where the `[T]` introduces a type parameter, written as `<T>` in Java and C):
```
class Tuple2[T1, T2](item1: T1, item2: T2)
class Tuple3[T1, T2, T3](item1: T1, item2: T2, item3: T3)
class Tuple4[T1, T2, T3, T4](item1: T1, item2: T2, item3: T3, item4: T4)
```
At some point you simply have to stop...  And for (unnamed) tuples, I would consider 22 to be a rather generous limit ;-).

recursive functions such as::

  def fib(arg):
      match arg:
          case 0:
              return 1
          case 1:
              return 1
          case n:
              return fib(n-1) + fib(n-2)

As pattern matching was repeatedly integrated into new and emerging
programming languages, its syntax slightly evolved and expanded.  The two
first cases in the ``fib`` example above could be written more succinctly
as ``case 0 | 1:`` with ``|`` denoting alternative patterns.  Moreover, the
underscore ``_`` was generally accepted as a wildcard, a filler where neither
the structure nor value of parts of a pattern were of substance.  Since the
underscore is already frequently used in equivalent capacity in Python's
iterable unpacking (e.g., ``_, _, third, _* = something``) we kept these

> universal standards.

Reviewer: This is already explained there I think.

It is noteworthy that the concept of pattern matching has always been
closely linked to the concept of functions.  The different case clauses
have always been considered as something like semi-indepedent functions
where pattern variables take on the role of parameters.  This becomes
most apparent when pattern matching is written as an overloaded function,
along the lines of::

  def fib( 0 | 1 ):
      return 1
  def fib( n ):
      return fib(n-1) + fib(n-2)

Even though such a strict separation of case clauses into independent
functions does not make sense in Python, we find that patterns share many
syntactic rules with parameters, such as binding arguments to local

> variables only or that variable/parameter names must not be repeated for

Reviewer: Agreed.

a particular pattern/function.

With its emphasis on abstraction and encapsulation, object-oriented
programming posed a serious challenge to pattern matching.  In short: in
object-oriented programming, we can no longer view objects as tagged tuples.
The arguments passed into the constructor do not necessarily specify the
attributes or fields of the objects.  Moreover, there is no longer a strict
ordering of an object's fields and some of the fields might be private and
thus inaccessible.  And on top of this, the given object might actually be
an instance of a subclass with slightly different structure.

To address this challenge, patterns became increasingly independent of the
original tuple constructors.  In a pattern like ``Node(left, right)``,
``Node`` is no longer a passive tag, but rather a function that can actively
check for any given object whether it has the right structure and extract a
``left`` and ``right`` field.  In other words: the ``Node``-tag becomes a
function that transforms an object into a tuple or returns ``None`` to

> indicate that it is not possible.

Author: I'm not sure we need to bring up returning None on failure (conceivably, the API could also raise an exception, since in either case the match machinery has to check for failure). Maybe "or returns some failure indicator if it is not possible"? "Failure indicator" is vague enough that raising an exception could be substituted.

Reviewer: Agreed.

In Python, we simply use ``isinstance()`` together with the ``__match_args__``
field of a class to check whether an object has the correct structure and
then transform some of its attributes into a tuple.  For the `Node` example
above, for instance, we would have ``__match_args__ = ('left', 'right')`` to
indicate that these two attributes should be extracted to form the tuple.
That is, ``case Node(x, y)`` would first check whether a given object is an
instance of ``Node`` and then assign ``left`` to ``x`` and ``right`` to ``y``,

> respectively.

Author: Doesn't this belong in a section about the class pattern (probably in the spec)? Presumably it's already described there. Maybe something not quite as nuts-and-bolts can be put here?

Reviewer: The idea here was to complete the arch and circle back to how our Python implementation picks up these ideas of pattern matching out there.  So, yes, we can certainly add this in other places, but my intention here was to make the connection actually explicit.  But we could probably shorten it and leave the example out.

Paying tribute to Python's dynamic nature with 'duck typing', however, we
also added a more direct way to specify the presence of, or constraints on
specific attributes.  Instead of ``Node(x, y)`` you could also write

> ``object(left=x, right=y)``, effectively eliminating the ``isinstance()``

Author: Okay, so that's the duck typing connection. It's clever, and needs to be mentioned somewhere (in the tutorial and/or in the rationale for the class pattern) but to me it always felt like an afterthought to the class pattern, and I actually hope that this doesn't become too popular.

Maybe just move it together with the previous paragraph.

Reviewer: Yes, absolutely, this is the duck typing I have been talking about all along :wink:.  However, I think we are quite in agreement.  My excitement conerning this is not about actually using this kind of pattern (if it can be helped), but I feel pattern matching in a dynamic language like Python would be kind of crippled without such a possibility.

check and thus supporting any object with ``left`` and ``right`` attributes.
Or you would combine these ideas to write ``Node(right=y)`` so as to require

> an instance of ``Node`` but only extract the value of the `right` attribute.

Author: Hopefully that's already clarified in the rationale or tutorial for the class pattern.

Reviewer: Yes, this really was an attempt to reiterate the ideas there to show that if you start at the source of pattern matching and follow it until you come to Python, our proposal is the natural way...

The ``match`` statement
-----------------------

> The match statement evaluates an expression to yield a subject, finds the

Author: ```suggestion
The match statement evaluates an expression to produce a subject, finds the
```

Patterns
--------

Patterns fulfill two purposes: they impose (structural) constraints on
the subject and they specify which data values should be extracted from
the subject and bound to variables.  In iterable unpacking, which can be
seen as a prototype to pattern matching in Python, there is only one
*structural pattern* to express sequences while there is a rich set of
*binding patterns* to assign a value to a specific variable or field.
Full pattern matching differs from this in that there is more variety
in structual patterns but only a minimum of binding patterns.

Patterns differ from assignment targets (as in iterable unpacking) in that
they impose additional constraints on the structure of the subject and in

> that a subject might savely fail to match a specific pattern at any point

Author: ```suggestion
that a subject might safely fail to match a specific pattern at any point
```
